@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@display
Guile-GI is a Guile package that hopes to provide access for
GObject-based libraries such as GTK+, GLib, WebKitGTK+ and many more.

It supports GNU/Linux, and has been tested with Guile-2.2 and
Guile-3.0. Guile GI is licensed under the GPL3+. This
documentation is licensed under the FDLv1.3+.

If you want to write a Guile application for GNOME or a Guile GUI
application using GTK+, then Guile-GI (when it is finished) will be
the way to go.
@end display

@quotation Warning
Guile-GI is in beta testing.  Interfaces are stabilizing, but, they are not
stable.  Please have patience and report bugs.
@end quotation

In this chapter we'll explain why there is a need for this project and
how to install it.  And we'll also describe the technologies that GTK
uses to make itself available to language bindings.  If you just want to
get to work, feel free to jump straight to the @ref{Tutorial} or
@ref{Reference Guide}.

@node The Concept of Operations
@section The Concept of Operations

GNU Guile itself does not provide its own graphical user interface (GUI)
programming toolkit; it needs to incorporate an existing GUI toolkit.
Of the existing GUI toolkits, GTK has been designed with the goal of
being language agnostic, usable with any programming language.

The application program interface (API) for GTK is large, with dozens of
classes and hundreds of functions.  It consist of several sub-projects:
GTK+, GDK, Pango, GLib and many others.  These APIs change from version
to version.  Creating a binding by hand -- wrapping each type and
function for use with Guile and then keeping it up do date -- would be a
laborious task.  Knowing this, GTK provides a way to query information
about the classes and functions it provides so that a binding may be
generated programmatically.  Instead of creating a Guile binding for all
of GTK and it subprojects, we create a Guile binding for its
introspection layer, and then use that information to make a Guile
binding for all of GTK.

To make a Guile binding for the introspection layer, we need to wrap
three application program interfaces.
@enumerate
@item
The GLib Dynamic Type System
@item
GObject - the fundamental base class for all object types in GTK+
@item
GIRepository - the GObject introspection repository manager
@end enumerate
Then, using information queried from these 3 API, a binding for GTK can
be made programmatically.  As a bonus, a binding to any project that
adheres to GObject standards can be created as well.

@node The GLib Dynamic Type System
@subsection The GLib Dynamic Type System

Information on the project's data types are stored in The GLib Dynamic
Type System@footnote{The GLib Dynamic Type System is sometimes called
GType for short, but, since the word GType is used for other things,
we'll keep using the full name @emph{ad nauseum}.}.  The GLib Dynamic
Type System's model for a data type is that you create a class and then
make instances of that class.  For it, each type can be described with
the following information
@itemize
@item
a GType - a unique integer ID for the type
@item
a type name
@item
a class data structure
@item
class initialization and destruction functions
@item
an instance data structure
@item
instance initialization and copy functions
@end itemize
This type system has inheritance: each type may be a specialization of a
parent type.  Note that the class-and-instance capability of The GLib
Dynamic Type System is its own unique beast: not identical to C++
classes or to GOOPS.

When the introspection layer describes constants, variables, and
function arguments, each of these @emph{must} have a type that is
registered by The GLib Dynamic Type System.  There are a set of
fundamental GType IDs, denoted with the form @code{G_TYPE_XXX}, and the
type of each variable or argument traces to a fundamental GType ID or
one that is subclassed from a fundamental type.

To allow introspection, there are GType IDs for all the standard native
types: @code{char} has @code{G_TYPE_CHAR}, @code{int} has
@code{G_TYPE_INT}, etc.  Each enumerated type or collection of flags has
its own type, which is a subclass of @code{G_TYPE_FLAGS} or
@code{G_TYPE_ENUM}.  Types that describe information stored in a typed
pointer, such as native @code{struct}, each have their own type that
is a subclass of @code{G_TYPE_BOXED}.

And, most importantly for GTK, there are types that descend from
@code{G_TYPE_OBJECT}. As we'll discuss in the next section, GObject is
the fundamental type providing the common attributes and methods for all
object types in GTK+, Pango, and other libraries based on GObject.

@node The GObject Class
@subsection The GObject Class

For GTK, the most important fundamental type is @code{G_TYPE_OBJECT}.
GObject is the house of cards upon which GTK is built.  GObject is the
base class for an object-oriented class system that provides specific
facilities for object-oriented programming in the context of GUIs.

@emph{Inheritance} - GObject classes are arranged in a hierarchy.  Each
class has the fundamental GObject class as its base class.  This
hierarchy is single-inheritance: each class has zero or more subclasses
and only one superclass.

@emph{Properties} - Each instance of a GObject class has a set of zero
or more typed parameters.  Subclasses have access to the parameters of
the parent, and subclasses may add additional parameters.  These are
like slots in GOOPS, except they are strongly typed.

@emph{Methods} - Each GObject class may define a set of methods or
generic functions that operate on that type.  A subclass inherits all
the methods of its superclass and may define additional methods.

@emph{Signals} - GObject classes define a general purpose notification
mechanism it calls @emph{signals} which are messages an instance can
transmit and receive@footnote{GObject signals are not UNIX signals, like
@code{SIGINT}.}  For each instance, a callback function can be defined
that is executed on the receipt of a given signal.  Signals are also
inherited: an instance of a subclass can catch all of the signals its
parent class can catch, plus it can define new signals.

In our binding, we do our best to express GObject and subclasses to
GObject in the context of GOOPS classes, but, there is some mismatch.

@node The GObject Introspection Repository Manager
@subsection The GObject Introspection Repository Manager

The GObject Introspection Repository Manager, or GIRepository for short,
is the API through which you can query all the available types, methods
and functions a library provides.

GTK provides an application program interface in a dynamic library.  On
Unix-like systems, the dynamic library is a shared object, @file{.so}
file.  On Microsoft Windows, the dynamic library is a Dynamic Link
Library, a @file{.dll} file.  Information on the proper initialization,
ownership, and destruction of in-memory objects is not intrinsic to
dynamic libraries.  Thus, to properly use them, you need
@emph{metadata}.

GTK provides metadata via The GObject Introspection Repository Manager.
Under GIRepository, each dynamic library also provides a companion
metadata file, a @file{.typelib} file.  If we can provide Guile with the
facility to parse @file{.typelib} files, we could safely call the API
the dynamic libraries provide.

These typelib files are in a custom binary format.  They commonly
contain the following information about a dynamic library:
@itemize
@item
constants
@item
flags and enums
@item
functions and their arguments
@item
structures and unions
@item
classes and methods
@end itemize

The task set out to Guile-GI is to parse a typelib, dynamically load a
shared library, and generate Guile procedures, constants, and GOOPS
types and generics that map to the contents of the shared library.

Several other libraries have also adopted GObject Introspection, so if
we can make it work for GTK, we get many other libraries for free.

@node Installation
@section Installation

In some happy future, you might be able to get this from whatever method
your operating system normally uses to download free software.

If you are trying to build this from the Git repository, use
@command{git clone} to copy the tree onto your computer. After cloning
the repository, run @command{./bootstrap} (or manually invoke @command{autoreconf})
to create a @file{configure} file.

If you are building from a @file{guile-gi.tar.gz}, unpack the file.

From there, running @command{configure}, then @command{make}, then
@command{sudo make install} will give you a running system.

In the file archives, look for a file named @file{INSTALL} for detailed
instructions.
